0
          
0
2
          
          

He a lt h

Fire

Re a c t iv it y

P e rs o n a l
P ro t e c t io n

2

0

0

E

Material Safety Data Sheet
Ammonium thiocyanate MSDS

Section 1: Chemical Product and Company Identification

Product Name: Ammonium thiocyanate

Contact Information:

Catalog Codes: SLA2137, SLA3637

CAS#: 1762-95-4

RTECS: XK7875000

TSCA: TSCA 8(b) inventory: Ammonium thiocyanate

CI#: Not available.

Synonym:  

Sciencelab.com, Inc.
14025 Smith Rd.
Houston, Texas 77396
US Sales: 1-800-901-7247
International Sales: 1-281-441-4400
Order Online: ScienceLab.com

CHEMTREC (24HR Emergency Telephone), call:
1-800-424-9300

Chemical Name: Ammonium Thiocyanate

International CHEMTREC, call: 1-703-527-3887

Chemical Formula: NH4SCN

For non-emergency assistance, call: 1-281-441-4400

Section 2: Composition and Information on Ingredients

Composition:

Name

Ammonium thiocyanate

CAS #

1762-95-4

% by Weight

100

Toxicological Data on Ingredients: Ammonium thiocyanate: ORAL (LD50): Acute: 750 mg/kg [Rat]. 500 mg/kg [Mouse]. 500
mg/kg [Guinea pig].

Section 3: Hazards Identification

Potential Acute Health Effects: Hazardous in case of skin contact (irritant), of eye contact (irritant), of ingestion, of inhalation.

Potential Chronic Health Effects:
CARCINOGENIC EFFECTS: Not available. MUTAGENIC EFFECTS: Not available. TERATOGENIC EFFECTS: Not available.
DEVELOPMENTAL TOXICITY: Not available. The substance may be toxic to blood, thyroid. Repeated or prolonged exposure
to the substance can produce target organs damage.

Section 4: First Aid Measures

Eye Contact:
Check for and remove any contact lenses. In case of contact, immediately flush eyes with plenty of water for at least 15
minutes. Cold water may be used. Get medical attention.

p. 1

Skin Contact:
In case of contact, immediately flush skin with plenty of water. Cover the irritated skin with an emollient. Remove contaminated
clothing and shoes. Cold water may be used.Wash clothing before reuse. Thoroughly clean shoes before reuse. Get medical
attention.

Serious Skin Contact:
Wash with a disinfectant soap and cover the contaminated skin with an anti-bacterial cream. Seek immediate medical
attention.

Inhalation:
If inhaled, remove to fresh air. If not breathing, give artificial respiration. If breathing is difficult, give oxygen. Get medical
attention.

Serious Inhalation: Not available.

Ingestion:
Do NOT induce vomiting unless directed to do so by medical personnel. Never give anything by mouth to an unconscious
person. If large quantities of this material are swallowed, call a physician immediately. Loosen tight clothing such as a collar,
tie, belt or waistband.

Serious Ingestion: Not available.

Section 5: Fire and Explosion Data

Flammability of the Product: Non-flammable.

Auto-Ignition Temperature: Not applicable.

Flash Points: Not applicable.

Flammable Limits: Not applicable.

Products of Combustion: Not available.

Fire Hazards in Presence of Various Substances: Not applicable.

Explosion Hazards in Presence of Various Substances:
Risks of explosion of the product in presence of mechanical impact: Not available. Risks of explosion of the product in
presence of static discharge: Not available.

Fire Fighting Media and Instructions: Not applicable.

Special Remarks on Fire Hazards: Not available.

Special Remarks on Explosion Hazards: Ammonium Thiocyanate + Lead Nitrate may cause explosion

Section 6: Accidental Release Measures

Small Spill:
Use appropriate tools to put the spilled solid in a convenient waste disposal container. Finish cleaning by spreading water on
the contaminated surface and dispose of according to local and regional authority requirements.

Large Spill:
Use a shovel to put the material into a convenient waste disposal container. Finish cleaning by spreading water on the
contaminated surface and allow to evacuate through the sanitary system.

Section 7: Handling and Storage

Precautions:
Do not ingest. Do not breathe dust. Wear suitable protective clothing. In case of insufficient ventilation, wear suitable
respiratory equipment. If ingested, seek medical advice immediately and show the container or the label. Avoid contact with
skin and eyes.

p. 2

Storage: Keep container tightly closed. Keep container in a cool, well-ventilated area.

Section 8: Exposure Controls/Personal Protection

Engineering Controls:
Use process enclosures, local exhaust ventilation, or other engineering controls to keep airborne levels below recommended
exposure limits. If user operations generate dust, fume or mist, use ventilation to keep exposure to airborne contaminants
below the exposure limit.

Personal Protection:
Splash goggles. Lab coat. Dust respirator. Be sure to use an approved/certified respirator or equivalent. Gloves.

Personal Protection in Case of a Large Spill:
Splash goggles. Full suit. Dust respirator. Boots. Gloves. A self contained breathing apparatus should be used to avoid
inhalation of the product. Suggested protective clothing might not be sufficient; consult a specialist BEFORE handling this
product.

Exposure Limits: Not available.

Physical state and appearance: Solid. (Crystals solid.)

Section 9: Physical and Chemical Properties

Odor: Odorless.

Taste: Not available.

Molecular Weight: 76.12g/mole

Color: Colorless.

pH (1% soln/water): Not available.

Boiling Point: Not available.

Melting Point: 149.6°C (301.3°F)

Critical Temperature: Not available.

Specific Gravity: 1.305 (Water = 1)

Vapor Pressure: Not applicable.

Vapor Density: Not available.

Volatility: Not available.

Odor Threshold: Not available.

Water/Oil Dist. Coeff.: Not available.

Ionicity (in Water): Not available.

Dispersion Properties: See solubility in water, acetone.

Solubility:
Easily soluble in cold water, hot water. Soluble in acetone. Soluble in ammonia, and alcohol. Practically incoluble in
chloroform, and ethyl acetate.

Stability: The product is stable.

Section 10: Stability and Reactivity Data

p. 3

Instability Temperature: Not available.

Conditions of Instability: Incompatible materials

Incompatibility with various substances: Not available.

Corrosivity:
Extremely corrosive in presence of copper, brass, iron. Non-corrosive in presence of glass.

Special Remarks on Reactivity: Incompatible with KClO3 and mixtures with Pb(NO3)2

Special Remarks on Corrosivity: Not available.

Polymerization: Will not occur.

Section 11: Toxicological Information

Routes of Entry: Inhalation. Ingestion.

Toxicity to Animals: Acute oral toxicity (LD50): 500 mg/kg [Guinea pig].

Chronic Effects on Humans: May cause damage to the following organs: blood, thyroid.

Other Toxic Effects on Humans: Hazardous in case of skin contact (irritant), of ingestion, of inhalation.

Special Remarks on Toxicity to Animals: Not available.

Special Remarks on Chronic Effects on Humans: Not available.

Special Remarks on other Toxic Effects on Humans:
Acute Potential Health Effects: Skin: Causes skin irritation Eyes: Causes eye irritation Inhalation: Causes respiratory tract
and mucous membrane irritation. Ingestion: May cause gastrointestinal tract irritation with nausea and vomiting. May affect
behavior/Central Nervous System (hallucinations, distorted perceptions, personality and mood changes, mania, disorientation,
weakness, seizures), metabolism. Chronic Potential Health Effects: Prolonged exposure may affect the thyroid gland and
blood cells, and cause personality and mood changes.

Section 12: Ecological Information

Ecotoxicity: Not available.

BOD5 and COD: Not available.

Products of Biodegradation:
Possibly hazardous short term degradation products are not likely. However, long term degradation products may arise.

Toxicity of the Products of Biodegradation: The products of degradation are less toxic than the product itself.

Special Remarks on the Products of Biodegradation: Not available.

Section 13: Disposal Considerations

Waste Disposal:
Waste must be disposed of in accordance with federal, state and local environmental control regulations.

Section 14: Transport Information

DOT Classification: Not a DOT controlled material (United States).

Identification: Not applicable.

p. 4

Special Provisions for Transport: Not applicable.

Section 15: Other Regulatory Information

Federal and State Regulations:
Connecticut hazardous material survey.: Ammonium thiocyanate Illinois toxic substances disclosure to employee act:
Ammonium thiocyanate Illinois chemical safety act: Ammonium thiocyanate New York release reporting list: Ammonium
thiocyanate Pennsylvania RTK: Ammonium thiocyanate Massachusetts RTK: Ammonium thiocyanate Massachusetts spill
list: Ammonium thiocyanate New Jersey: Ammonium thiocyanate New Jersey spill list: Ammonium thiocyanate Louisiana
spill reporting: Ammonium thiocyanate TSCA 8(b) inventory: Ammonium thiocyanate CERCLA: Hazardous substances.:
Ammonium thiocyanate: 5000 lbs. (2268 kg)

Other Regulations:
OSHA: Hazardous by definition of Hazard Communication Standard (29 CFR 1910.1200). EINECS: This product is on the
European Inventory of Existing Commercial Chemical Substances.

Other Classifications:

WHMIS (Canada): Not controlled under WHMIS (Canada).

DSCL (EEC):
R20/21/22- Harmful by inhalation, in contact with skin and if swallowed. R36/37/38- Irritating to eyes, respiratory system and
skin. S2- Keep out of the reach of children. S26- In case of contact with eyes, rinse immediately with plenty of water and seek
medical advice. S36- Wear suitable protective clothing. S46- If swallowed, seek medical advice immediately and show this
container or label.

HMIS (U.S.A.):

Health Hazard: 2

Fire Hazard: 0

Reactivity: 0

Personal Protection: E

National Fire Protection Association (U.S.A.):

Health: 2

Flammability: 0

Reactivity: 0

Specific hazard:

Protective Equipment:
Gloves. Lab coat. Dust respirator. Be sure to use an approved/certified respirator or equivalent. Splash goggles.

Section 16: Other Information

References: Not available.

Other Special Considerations: Not available.

Created: 10/10/2005 08:14 PM

Last Updated: 05/21/2013 12:00 PM

The information above is believed to be accurate and represents the best information currently available to us. However, we
make no warranty of merchantability or any other warranty, express or implied, with respect to such information, and we assume
no liability resulting from its use. Users should make their own investigations to determine the suitability of the information for
their particular purposes. In no event shall ScienceLab.com be liable for any claims, losses, or damages of any third party or for

p. 5

lost profits or any special, indirect, incidental, consequential or exemplary damages, howsoever arising, even if ScienceLab.com
has been advised of the possibility of such damages.

p. 6

