1
          
0
3
          
          

3

1

0

He a lt h

Fire

Re a c t iv it y

P e rs o n a l
P ro t e c t io n

Material Safety Data Sheet

Dichloroacetic acid MSDS

Section 1: Chemical Product and Company Identification

Product Name: Dichloroacetic acid

Contact Information:

Catalog Codes: SLD3049

CAS#: 79-43-6

RTECS: AG6125000

TSCA: TSCA 8(b) inventory: Dichloroacetic acid

CI#: Not available.

Synonym:  

Chemical Name: Dichloroacetic Acid

Chemical Formula: C2-H2-Cl2-O2

Sciencelab.com, Inc.
14025 Smith Rd.
Houston, Texas 77396
US Sales: 1-800-901-7247
International Sales: 1-281-441-4400
Order Online: ScienceLab.com

CHEMTREC (24HR Emergency Telephone), call:
1-800-424-9300

International CHEMTREC, call: 1-703-527-3887

For non-emergency assistance, call: 1-281-441-4400

Section 2: Composition and Information on Ingredients

Composition:

Name

Dichloroacetic acid

CAS #

79-43-6

% by Weight

100

Toxicological Data on Ingredients: Dichloroacetic acid: ORAL (LD50): Acute: 2820 mg/kg [Rat]. DERMAL (LD50): Acute:
510 mg/kg [Rabbit].

Section 3: Hazards Identification

Potential Acute Health Effects:
Extremely hazardous in case of skin contact (corrosive, irritant), of eye contact (irritant), of ingestion, . Very hazardous in case
of skin contact (permeator). Hazardous in case of inhalation (lung irritant). Liquid or spray mist may produce tissue damage
particularly on mucous membranes of eyes, mouth and respiratory tract. Skin contact may produce burns. Inhalation of the
spray mist may produce severe irritation of respiratory tract, characterized by coughing, choking, or shortness of breath.
Inflammation of the eye is characterized by redness, watering, and itching. Skin inflammation is characterized by itching,
scaling, reddening, or, occasionally, blistering.
Potential Chronic Health Effects:
CARCINOGENIC EFFECTS: 3 (Not classifiable for human.) by IARC. MUTAGENIC EFFECTS: Not available. TERATOGENIC
EFFECTS: Not available. DEVELOPMENTAL TOXICITY: PROVEN The substance is toxic to lungs, the reproductive system,
liver, mucous membranes. Repeated or prolonged exposure to the substance can produce target organs damage. Repeated
or prolonged contact with spray mist may produce chronic eye irritation and severe skin irritation. Repeated or prolonged
exposure to spray mist may produce respiratory tract irritation leading to frequent attacks of bronchial infection.

p. 1

Section 4: First Aid Measures

Eye Contact:
Check for and remove any contact lenses. Immediately flush eyes with running water for at least 15 minutes, keeping eyelids
open. Cold water may be used. Do not use an eye ointment. Seek medical attention.

Skin Contact:
If the chemical got onto the clothed portion of the body, remove the contaminated clothes as quickly as possible, protecting
your own hands and body. Place the victim under a deluge shower. If the chemical got on the victim's exposed skin, such
as the hands : Gently and thoroughly wash the contaminated skin with running water and non-abrasive soap. Be particularly
careful to clean folds, crevices, creases and groin. Cold water may be used. If irritation persists, seek medical attention. Wash
contaminated clothing before reusing.

Serious Skin Contact:
Wash with a disinfectant soap and cover the contaminated skin with an anti-bacterial cream. Seek immediate medical
attention.

Inhalation: Allow the victim to rest in a well ventilated area. Seek immediate medical attention.

Serious Inhalation:
Evacuate the victim to a safe area as soon as possible. Loosen tight clothing such as a collar, tie, belt or waistband. If
breathing is difficult, administer oxygen. If the victim is not breathing, perform mouth-to-mouth resuscitation. WARNING: It may
be hazardous to the person providing aid to give mouth-to-mouth resuscitation when the inhaled material is toxic, infectious or
corrosive. Seek immediate medical attention.

Ingestion:
Do not induce vomiting. Examine the lips and mouth to ascertain whether the tissues are damaged, a possible indication that
the toxic material was ingested; the absence of such signs, however, is not conclusive. Loosen tight clothing such as a collar,
tie, belt or waistband. If the victim is not breathing, perform mouth-to-mouth resuscitation. Seek immediate medical attention.

Serious Ingestion: Not available.

Flammability of the Product: May be combustible at high temperature.

Section 5: Fire and Explosion Data

Auto-Ignition Temperature: Not available.

Flash Points: CLOSED CUP: 110°C (230°F).

Flammable Limits: Not available.

Products of Combustion: These products are carbon oxides (CO, CO2), halogenated compounds.

Fire Hazards in Presence of Various Substances: Not available.

Explosion Hazards in Presence of Various Substances:
Risks of explosion of the product in presence of mechanical impact: Not available. Risks of explosion of the product in
presence of static discharge: Not available.

Fire Fighting Media and Instructions:
SMALL FIRE: Use DRY chemical powder. LARGE FIRE: Use water spray, fog or foam. Do not use water jet.

Special Remarks on Fire Hazards: Not available.

Special Remarks on Explosion Hazards: Not available.

Section 6: Accidental Release Measures

Small Spill:
Dilute with water and mop up, or absorb with an inert dry material and place in an appropriate waste disposal container.

p. 2

Large Spill:
Corrosive liquid. Stop leak if without risk. Absorb with DRY earth, sand or other non-combustible material. Do not get water
inside container. Do not touch spilled material. Use water spray curtain to divert vapor drift. Prevent entry into sewers,
basements or confined areas; dike if needed. Eliminate all ignition sources. Call for assistance on disposal.

Section 7: Handling and Storage

Precautions:
Keep container dry. Keep away from heat. Keep away from sources of ignition. Empty containers pose a fire risk, evaporate
the residue under a fume hood. Ground all equipment containing material. Do not ingest. Do not breathe gas/fumes/ vapour/
spray. Never add water to this product In case of insufficient ventilation, wear suitable respiratory equipment If ingested, seek
medical advice immediately and show the container or the label. Avoid contact with skin and eyes

Storage:
Keep container dry. Keep in a cool place. Ground all equipment containing material. Corrosive materials should be stored in a
separate safety storage cabinet or room.

Section 8: Exposure Controls/Personal Protection

Engineering Controls:
Provide exhaust ventilation or other engineering controls to keep the airborne concentrations of vapors below their respective
threshold limit value. Ensure that eyewash stations and safety showers are proximal to the work-station location.

Personal Protection:
Face shield. Full suit. Vapor respirator. Be sure to use an approved/certified respirator or equivalent. Gloves. Boots.

Personal Protection in Case of a Large Spill:
Splash goggles. Full suit. Vapor respirator. Boots. Gloves. A self contained breathing apparatus should be used to avoid
inhalation of the product. Suggested protective clothing might not be sufficient; consult a specialist BEFORE handling this
product.

Exposure Limits: Not available.

Section 9: Physical and Chemical Properties

Physical state and appearance: Liquid.

Odor: Not available.

Taste: Not available.

Molecular Weight: 128.94 g/mole

Color: Colorless.

pH (1% soln/water): Not available.

Boiling Point: 193.5°C (380.3°F)

Melting Point: 10°C (50°F)

Critical Temperature: Not available.

Specific Gravity: 1.5634 (Water = 1)

Vapor Pressure: 0.179 mm of Hg (@ 20°C)

Vapor Density: 4.45 (Air = 1)

Volatility: Not available.

Odor Threshold: 0.2 ppm

p. 3

Water/Oil Dist. Coeff.: Not available.

Ionicity (in Water): Not available.

Dispersion Properties:
Easily dispersed in methanol, diethyl ether. Dispersed in n-octanol. See solubility in water, methanol, diethyl ether, n-octanol,
acetone.

Solubility:
Easily soluble in cold water, methanol, diethyl ether, acetone. Soluble in n-octanol.

Section 10: Stability and Reactivity Data

Stability: The product is stable.

Instability Temperature: Not available.

Conditions of Instability: Not available.

Incompatibility with various substances: Not available.

Corrosivity: Not available.

Special Remarks on Reactivity: Not available.

Special Remarks on Corrosivity: Not available.

Polymerization: No.

Section 11: Toxicological Information

Routes of Entry: Absorbed through skin. Dermal contact. Eye contact. Inhalation. Ingestion.

Toxicity to Animals:
Acute oral toxicity (LD50): 2820 mg/kg [Rat]. Acute dermal toxicity (LD50): 510 mg/kg [Rabbit].

Chronic Effects on Humans:
CARCINOGENIC EFFECTS: 3 (Not classifiable for human.) by IARC. DEVELOPMENTAL TOXICITY: PROVEN The
substance is toxic to lungs, the reproductive system, liver, mucous membranes.

Other Toxic Effects on Humans:
Extremely hazardous in case of skin contact (corrosive, irritant), of ingestion, . Very hazardous in case of skin contact
(permeator). Hazardous in case of inhalation (lung irritant).

Special Remarks on Toxicity to Animals: Not available.

Special Remarks on Chronic Effects on Humans: Not available.

Special Remarks on other Toxic Effects on Humans: Not available.

Section 12: Ecological Information

Ecotoxicity: Not available.

BOD5 and COD: Not available.

Products of Biodegradation:
Possibly hazardous short term degradation products are not likely. However, long term degradation products may arise.

Toxicity of the Products of Biodegradation: The products of degradation are as toxic as the original product.

Special Remarks on the Products of Biodegradation: Not available.

p. 4

Waste Disposal:

Section 13: Disposal Considerations

Section 14: Transport Information

DOT Classification: CLASS 8: Corrosive liquid.

Identification: : Dichloroacetic acid : UN1764 PG: II

Special Provisions for Transport: Not available.

Section 15: Other Regulatory Information

Federal and State Regulations:
California prop. 65: This product contains the following ingredients for which the State of California has found to cause cancer,
birth defects or other reproductive harm, which would require a warning under the statute: Dichloroacetic acid California prop.
65: This product contains the following ingredients for which the State of California has found to cause cancer which would
require a warning under the statute: Dichloroacetic acid New Jersey: Dichloroacetic acid TSCA 8(b) inventory: Dichloroacetic
acid TSCA 8(d) H and S data reporting: Dichloroacetic acid: March 1999

Other Regulations:
OSHA: Hazardous by definition of Hazard Communication Standard (29 CFR 1910.1200). EINECS: This product is on the
European Inventory of Existing Commercial Chemical Substances.

Other Classifications:

WHMIS (Canada):
CLASS D-1B: Material causing immediate and serious toxic effects (TOXIC). CLASS D-2A: Material causing other toxic effects
(VERY TOXIC). CLASS E: Corrosive liquid.

DSCL (EEC):
R21- Harmful in contact with skin. R35- Causes severe burns.

HMIS (U.S.A.):

Health Hazard: 3

Fire Hazard: 1

Reactivity: 0

Personal Protection:

National Fire Protection Association (U.S.A.):

Health: 3

Flammability: 1

Reactivity: 0

Specific hazard:

Protective Equipment:
Gloves. Full suit. Vapor respirator. Be sure to use an approved/certified respirator or equivalent. Wear appropriate respirator
when ventilation is inadequate. Face shield.

References: Not available.

Section 16: Other Information

p. 5

Other Special Considerations: Not available.

Created: 10/09/2005 05:07 PM

Last Updated: 05/21/2013 12:00 PM

The information above is believed to be accurate and represents the best information currently available to us. However, we
make no warranty of merchantability or any other warranty, express or implied, with respect to such information, and we assume
no liability resulting from its use. Users should make their own investigations to determine the suitability of the information for
their particular purposes. In no event shall ScienceLab.com be liable for any claims, losses, or damages of any third party or for
lost profits or any special, indirect, incidental, consequential or exemplary damages, howsoever arising, even if ScienceLab.com
has been advised of the possibility of such damages.

p. 6

